.TH OMNI-LANGUAGE 7 "March 2026" "Omni 0.1.5" "Omni Lisp Language"
.SH NAME
omni-language \- Omni Lisp language quick reference
.SH SYNOPSIS
Reference guide for Omni syntax, core forms, collections, dispatch, and effects.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Omni is an expression-oriented Lisp with strict function arity, multiple
dispatch, algebraic effects, and deterministic scope/region lifetimes.
.PP
Truthiness rule:
.B nil
and
.B false
are falsy; all other values are truthy.
.SH CORE FORMS
.TP
.B define
Bind values and functions.
.TP
.B let
Lexical bindings.
.TP
.B if
Conditional expression.
.TP
.B block
Evaluate forms in order and return the last value.
.TP
.B lambda
Anonymous function with strict arity.
.TP
.B match
Pattern matching for data and control flow.
.TP
.B handle / signal / resolve
Algebraic effect operations.
.SH COLLECTIONS
Omni has three primary collection types:
.IP "\(bu" 2
list
.IP "\(bu" 2
array
.IP "\(bu" 2
dict
.PP
Prefer generic operations such as:
.B length ,
.B ref ,
.B map ,
.B filter ,
.B foldl
rather than type-prefixed variants.
.SH LITERALS
.TP
.B '(1 2 3)
List literal.
.TP
.B [1 2 3]
Array literal.
.TP
.B {'name "omni" 'year 2026}
Dict literal.
.SH DEFINITIONS
.EX
(define x 10)
(define (inc n) (+ n 1))
(define add2 (lambda (a b) (+ a b)))
.EE
.SH CONTROL FLOW
.EX
(if (> x 5) "big" "small")

(let (a 3 b 4)
  (+ a b))

(match value
  (nil "none")
  ([h .. t] h)
  (_ "other"))
.EE
.SH DISPATCH
Omni supports multiple dispatch by parameter annotations.
.PP
Value-level and type-level dispatch may coexist. Ambiguous best matches are
rejected.
.SH EFFECTS
.EX
(handle
  (block
    (signal ask 'name))
  (ask _ (resolve "world")))
.EE
.PP
Handlers are nearest-first by dynamic scope.
.SH MODULES
Import all exported names:
.EX
(import "module.omni" 'all)
.EE
.SH CLI AND TOOLING
.TP
.B omni --init <name>
Scaffold a project.
.TP
.B omni --bind [dir]
Generate FFI bindings from
.I omni.toml
\&.
.TP
.B omni --language-ref
Print this quick reference from the embedded compressed payload.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR omni (1),
.BR docs/LANGUAGE_SPEC.md ,
.BR docs/PROJECT_TOOLING.md
.SH NOTES
This page is a quick reference. The normative language contract is in
.I docs/LANGUAGE_SPEC.md
within the Omni repository.
