.TH OMNI 1 "March 2026" "Omni 0.2.0" "Omni Lisp Tools"
.SH NAME
omni \- Omni Lisp CLI, REPL, and project tooling
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B omni
[\fIoptions\fR] [\fIscript.omni\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B omni
starts the Omni Lisp REPL, runs scripts, executes test suites, scaffolds new
projects, and generates FFI bindings.
.PP
When run with no arguments,
.B omni
starts the REPL.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --repl
Start the REPL (explicit).
.TP
.B --repl --json
Start a structured JSON REPL transport.
.TP
.BI --repl-server " --socket <path> [--project [dir]]"
Start a Unix-socket REPL server that speaks newline-delimited JSON events.
.TP
.BI --repl-server " --tcp <host> <port> [--project [dir]]"
Start a TCP REPL server that speaks the same newline-delimited JSON protocol.
.TP
.BI --repl-server " --stdio [--project [dir]]"
Start the same REPL server protocol on stdin/stdout.
.TP
.BI --eval " <expr> " "[--json]"
Evaluate one Omni expression supplied on the command line.
Use
.B --json
to emit a structured result payload.
.TP
.BI --describe " <symbol> " "[--json]"
Describe a core Omni symbol (special form or builtin help entry).
Use
.B --json
to emit a structured result payload.
.TP
.BI --check " <file> " "[--json]"
Parse/check Omni source without executing it.
Use
.B --json
to emit structured diagnostics with 0-based ranges and non-zero exit status on
syntax, lowering, or read failures.
.TP
.BI --fmt " [--write|--check] <file>"
Apply the conservative formatter.
Default mode prints formatted text to stdout,
.B --write
rewrites the file in place, and
.B --check
returns non-zero when formatting changes would be applied.
.TP
.BI --test-suite " <all|stack|scope|lisp> " "[--json]"
Run one test suite (default: all).
.TP
.BI --build " <file> " "[-o output]"
AOT compile to standalone binary.
.TP
.BI --compile " <file> <out.c3>"
Compile Omni source to C3.
.TP
.BI --init " <name>"
Scaffold a new Omni project.
.TP
.BI --bind " [project-dir]"
Generate FFI bindings from
.I omni.toml
\&. Overlong header paths and header sets that exceed the current fixed parse buffer fail with an error instead of producing partial bindings.
.TP
.B --gen-e2e
Generate end-to-end compiler tests.
.TP
.B --language-ref, --lang-ref, --manual
Print the built-in full language reference.
.TP
.B --stack-affinity-probe
Deliberately trigger stack ownership fail-fast probe.
.TP
.B -v, --version
Print version.
.TP
.B -h, --help
Print this help.
.SH PROJECT COMMANDS
.SS Init
.EX
omni --init myproject
cd myproject
.EE
After scaffold creation, first-party recommendation is:
.EX
omni --check src/main.omni
.EE
For editor tooling wiring (Tree-sitter, LSP, Neovim), see:
.I docs/PROJECT_TOOLING.md
\&.
.SS Bind
.EX
omni --bind
omni --bind /path/to/project
.EE
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Start the REPL (default):
.EX
omni
.EE
.TP
Run script:
.EX
omni script.omni
.EE
.TP
Evaluate one expression:
.EX
omni --eval '(+ 1 2)'
omni --eval --json '(+ 1 2)'
.EE
.TP
Describe a symbol:
.EX
omni --describe define
omni --describe --json define
.EE
.TP
Structured REPL transport:
.EX
printf '%s\n' '{"id":"1","input":"(+ 1 2)","mode":"expr"}' | omni --repl --json
.EE
In JSON REPL transport mode, stdout is reserved for protocol replies and user
print/display output is emitted on stderr.
Preflight failures before request processing now return one JSON error object
on stdout instead of plaintext CLI text.
.TP
Unix-socket REPL server:
.EX
omni --repl-server --socket /tmp/omni.sock
omni --repl-server --socket /tmp/omni.sock --project
.EE
The phase-1 server accepts JSON-line requests for
.BR describe ,
.BR clone ,
.BR close ,
.BR complete ,
.BR eval ,
.BR interrupt ,
.BR stdin ,
and
.BR load-file .
User
.BR print / display
output is captured as
.B out
events instead of appearing raw on the socket stream.
Cancelled
.BR eval / load-file
requests terminate with an
.B interrupted
event.
The
.B stdin
operation routes data into
.BR read-line ,
and accepts an optional
.B eof
flag to close routed input.
Startup failures before any client attaches now return one JSON error object on
stdout instead of plaintext CLI/listener text.
.TP
Stdio REPL server:
.EX
printf '%s\n' '{"id":"1","op":"describe"}' | omni --repl-server --stdio
printf '%s\n' '{"id":"1","op":"clone"}' | omni --repl-server --stdio --project ./demo
.EE
This uses the same session/op/event protocol as the Unix-socket server, but on
stdin/stdout instead of a filesystem socket path. Preflight failures before
request processing now return one JSON error object on stdout. While a request
is running,
additional non-\fBinterrupt\fR requests receive
.B protocol/server-busy .
.TP
TCP REPL server:
.EX
omni --repl-server --tcp 127.0.0.1 5555
omni --repl-server --tcp 127.0.0.1 5555 --project ./demo
.EE
This uses the same protocol over a TCP listener and currently serves one client
connection at a time. Startup failures before client attach now return one JSON
error object on stdout instead of plaintext CLI/listener text.
After the listener binds successfully, Omni writes
.B .omni-repl-port
in the current working directory so editor plugins can discover the TCP port.
The file currently contains the bound port followed by a newline.
If started with
.B --project
or
.BI --project " <dir>" ,
each new
.B clone
session preloads the resolved
.I src/main.omni
entrypoint before the session is announced.
Abrupt termination can leave a stale discovery file, so clients should still
verify that the endpoint accepts connections.
.TP
Format one file:
.EX
omni --fmt script.omni
omni --fmt --write script.omni
omni --fmt --check script.omni
.EE
.TP
Run test suite:
.EX
omni --test-suite all
omni --test-suite all --json
.EE
.TP
Check without executing:
.EX
omni --check app.omni
omni --check --json app.omni
.EE
.TP
Compile to executable:
.EX
omni --build app.omni -o app
.EE
.TP
Compile to C3:
.EX
omni --compile app.omni app.c3
.EE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I omni.toml
Project tooling config used by
.B --bind
\&.
.TP
.I src/main.omni
Default entrypoint created by
.B --init
\&.
.TP
.I docs/PROJECT_TOOLING.md
Detailed project tooling guide.
.SH INSTALLATION
Repository install helper:
.EX
scripts/install_omni.sh install
scripts/install_omni.sh uninstall
.EE
The helper installs:
.IP "\(bu" 2
launcher:
.I <prefix>/bin/omni
.IP "\(bu" 2
binary:
.I <prefix>/lib/omni/omni-bin
.IP "\(bu" 2
man page:
.I <prefix>/share/man/man1/omni.1
.IP "\(bu" 2
language reference:
.I <prefix>/share/man/man7/omni-language.7
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR omni-language (7),
.BR docs/LANGUAGE_SPEC.md ,
.BR docs/PROJECT_TOOLING.md
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Usage error, parse/check failure, runtime failure, or tooling failure.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid test-suite name.
